Welcome back.
Up until now we've talked about topics that are definitely important but they won't really affect your
day to day coding and you won't get really asked about what we just learned about interpreters and compilers.
In an interview but starting in this video we're going to learn about something that will come up again
and again in your career.
That's very important and foundational to javascript that any senior developer should know.
And it's also something that we're going to keep bringing up over and over throughout this course.
So make sure you pay attention.
And up to this point you might have wondered why I ignored completely this little pink and orange box
the call stack and the memory heap.
And good you've been paying attention because we're going to talk about this over the next couple of
videos.
You see we learned that the JavaScript engine does a lot of work for us.
But the biggest thing is actually reading our code and executing it right.
And what do you think the two most important things in this step are.
That is one we need a place to store and right information that is to store our variables our objects
our data of our apps and a place to actually run and keep track of what's happening line by line on
our coat while we use call stack and memory heap for that we need the memory heap as a place to store
and write information because at the end of the day all programs are just read and write operations.
That way we have a place to allocate memory use memory and release memory.
That is to remove it just like these cupboards over here and too with the cold stack.
We need a place to keep track of where we are in the code.
So with that we can run the code in order and with these two things the JavaScript engine is able to
do that so to review the memory heap is where the memory allocation happens and the code sack is where
the engine keeps track of where your code is and it's execution but enough diagrams looks to actually
show you an example when we look at call stack and memory HEAP Well if we write a simple concept number
equals 6 10 what we're saying here is please allocate memory for the number variable and make this number
variable point two in memory in our memory heap the value 610 if we do let's say a string.
It's the same thing we're going to tell the engine to hey please allocate memory for a string variable.
So now whenever we use string we can say oh go into our memory string is pointing to somewhere in our
memory to this value of some text another way to think about it is if we have an object that is going
to equal first name is going to be Andre and last will be my very confusing last name that nobody can
pronounce Nagoya and all we're telling the computer here is saying allocate memory for an object and
its values.
So now we're telling the JavaScript engine hey I'm going to assign this human variable and this human
variable is going to point anytime I call it to a region in memory in our memory heap that has these
values the first and Laskey that point to Andre and Nagoya values to review our memory heap is simply
a free store is a large region in memory that the JavaScript engine provides for us which can be used
to store any type of arbitrary data in an unordered fashion there's no order to this memory it just
allows us to use variables to point to different storage areas just like a little cupboard here and
a lot of science goes into optimizing the way space is allocated here but we don't need to worry about
that we know that the engine takes care for us to put data into storage boxes for us and that's pretty
easy right memory heap is not that hard just a place for us to store our information but what about
the next one call stack how does that help us.
Well if we go back to our code let's write some code here and we'll create something very simple we'll
have a function that will be called calculate and this function well have a sum total that does some
random calculation like four plus five and it's going to return sum total it's going to return 9.
So as we know this function is going to be allocated to memory so that any time we call calculate it's
going to look in memory and see.
Oh yeah.
Calculate.
I have it right here.
Here run this piece of code and every time we run this code calculate we use the call stack so we can
think of call stack as a region in memory which operates in first in last out mode.
What does that mean well when we run calculate we simply on our call stack it's going to just add the
calculate function on top of the stack.
And after we finish running this function it's going to remove it now to make this a little bit clearer.
Let's add another function to here and then we're actually going to run this in Google Chrome to show
you what's happening.
I'm going to create another function called subtract 2 man it's going to take a number as a parameter
and what's going to just return num minus two just going to subtract 2.
So that in our calculate function we can just return subtract to and give it the sum total.
So it's going to subtract 2 from 9.
So it should give us 7.
Now let's see how the call stack is going to work.
When we run this function I'm going to copy this and go to our Google Chrome developer console.
Now I'm going to click on sources here and you might have to click on this arrow to go to snippets and
I can just add a new snippet here.
And as you can see here on the right hand side I have something called coal stack that will show us
what's happening fight.
Copy and paste this code.
Let's see what the call stack does.
I'm going to add a debugger statement in here which is going to pause the execution right here before
I write.
Calculate and let's hit run and see what happens.
All right.
We've paused our execution as you can see here before we've done calculate.
So the JavaScript engine has gone through this piece of code.
I see that.
OK.
We've declared our functions.
The JavaScript engine knows what.
Subtract 2 and calculate is and it has some place in memory that it stored this information but we haven't
run anything yet.
But on the coal stack I see something called Anonymous here that we didn't see before.
What is that.
Well that's the global execution context and it's something that we're going to talk about in the next
section.
But for now it's anonymous because there's no name for this file.
This is the JavaScript engine saying hey I'm running this file.
This is the first item on the stack.
And the first action that we take is to run this file if I put on this down arrow we will see that we
get to calculate that's the next step in the JavaScript engine.
In fact click down again see what happens to call stack here
the calculate function just got pushed on top of the stack.
So our call stack now has the anonymous function which was the global execution context which was the
main run of our file but now because we run a function we're inside of this function now on top of the
call stack we have calculate if I go next I see that I've calculated the sum total and the next line
is going to be subtract to see what happens to the call stack here.
If I click Next we're now inside of subtract to another function was called and we push another item
on the stack now here's the interesting part.
We are not done with the calculator function are we.
We're still inside of this calculate function.
And because this calculate function called subtract 2 We're now inside of subtract 2.
I know kind of confusing kind of like inception but that's what's happening here.
The call stack tells us hey right now where are we in the code.
While we're at.
Subtract two.
Once we're done with subtract two then we can go back to calculate and then once we're done with calculate
then we can go back to the global anonymous function which is what happens in line eleven here.
Once we finish our work so watch if I click Next the subtract two is now going to return num minus to
and the call stack these subtract two gets popped off the call stack we're now at calculate and we have
some total which is nine and we know what subtract two is that is num minus seven.
So if I go next calculate gets returned and if I go next we're done with the function.
Look at that our answer returned seven and that's what a call stack does the call stack stores functions
and variables as your code executes at each entry State of the stack also called the stack frame which
is the frame over here these three stacks allows us to know where we are in the code and it runs in
a first in last out mode.
That is the first one N is the last one getting popped up and we can keep adding keep adding to the
stack and eventually it pops Pops Pops all the function calls until we are done with our commands and
we use the memory heap to actually point to different variables and objects and data that we store so
that we know where to look and by the way this is the way it works in most programming languages we
have call stacks and memory heaps and these are the two locations that JavaScript remembers items.
Now since every JavaScript engine has different implementations where variables are allocated is not
100 percent the same all the time so a good way to think about it is this simple variables can usually
be stored on the stack and we'll learn about this later on and object's complex data structures like
objects arrays and functions which we're going to talk about are stored in memory heaps the cool thing
about call stacks is that it allows javascript to know where it needs to be in the code whatever is
on top of the call stack is where javascript is running how genius is that one last thing.
If we go back to the function that we had and let's say this time around we're just going to return
some total and not going to use subtract to function at all.
Instead we're going to run calculate twice what do you think's gonna happen well if I run this code
we have our global execution context we had next because a new function was called we added to the stack
on top there we go and now we run through this code and we return 9 and the call stack calculate function
gets popped off we're done with the function and then we go on to next line which is line eleven and
once again we call this function as soon as we call a function it gets popped or pushed onto this stack
a runs through the code and then returns and it gets removed from the stack.
All right.
We've gotten that part.
Now let's get into a fun video where we try and break this and cause a stack overflow.
I'll see in the next one by.